.\" Copyright (C) 2014-2024 Kevin Boone 
.\" Permission is granted to any individual or institution to use, copy, or
.\" redistribute this software so long as all of the original files are
.\" included, and that this copyright notice
.\" is retained.
.\"
.TH lbc 1 "December 2024"
.SH NAME
Linux Background Changer, LBC \- a stand-alone screen background changer for various linux desktops
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lbc 
.RB [options]\ {directories...} 
.PP

.SH EXAMPLE 

.B lbc\ -i\ 60\ $HOME/pictures/backgrounds\ -m\ gnome2

Uses the Gnome 2 method to switch backgrounds between images in 
the 'backgrounds' directory every 60 seconds.


.SH DESCRIPTION
LBC is simple program that runs quietly in the
background, and switches the desktop background image at a specified
time interval. It builds a list of image files by recursively searching
one or more directories for files whose names end in .jpg, .jpeg .png, or .gif, 
and which do not contain the text 'thumbnail'.   
LBC provides several different desktop
switching methods, to accomodate different desktops. 
 
.SH "BACKGROUND CHANGE METHODS"

.TP
.BI gnome-shell 
This is the default. With this method, the program uses the command
"gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.background picture-uri" to change
the background. This should work on any Gnome 3 system using gnome-shell as
the desktop manager, including Wayland-based systems.
.LP

.TP
.BI gnome2
This method uses the command "gconftool-2 --set 
/desktop/gnome/background/picture_filename" This should work on Gnome 2
and systems derived from it.
.LP

.TP
.BI xview 
This method uses the command "xview -onroot -fullscreen". Naturally, it will only
work if xview is installed, and if the X root window is visible. The
root window is not normally visible on Gnome and similar desktop setups, 
because
the desktop draws over it. However, it can sometimes be made visible
by disabling desktop painting. This method is mostly suitable for very
minimal X set-ups using old-style window managers.
.LP

.TP
.BI feh 
This method uses the command "feh --bg-fill". Naturally, it will only
work if feh is installed, and if the X root window is visible. 
This method is mostly suitable for very
minimal X set-ups using old-style window managers.
.LP

.TP
.BI xfce4 
This method uses \fIxfconf-query\fR to set the the backgrounds on up to two
monitors. In principle, Xfce4 allows different backgrounds on each virtual
desktop,
but this program does not make use of that feature.
.LP

.TP
.BI cmd 
This method executes a user-supplied command, provided by the \fI--cmd\fR
argument. The command will be executed with either one or two arguments; 
if \fI--dual\fR is set, there will be two arguments, one for each
image filename. Otherwise, there will be one argument. The command can carry out
any operation. Anything it produces to standard out or standard error will be
visible in foreground mode, otherwise the output is lost. 
.LP

.SH "OPTIONS"

.TP
.BI -a,--aspect={landscape|portrait|any} 
Include images with the specified aspect ratio. The default is 'any'.
.LP

.TP
.BI -d,--dirs={dir1:dir2...}
A colon-separated list of directories to include. This option 
is an alternative
to listing them as plain arguments to the program, which can be
included in a configuration file.
.LP

.TP
.BI --dual
Enable separate images on dual monitors, if the desktop supports it.
\fIlbc\fR shows a warning if this feature is enabled with a background
change method that does not support it.
.LP

.TP
.BI -f,--foreground
Run in the foreground, attached to console. This feature is for debugging
-- when run in the background, no logging is produced after all the initial
checks are made.
.LP

.TP
.BI --help
Show brief usage information 
.LP

.TP
.BI -h,--height={pixels}
Include only images of at least the specified height.
.LP

.TP
.BI -i,--interval={seconds}
Sets the time interval between background changes. The default is 120 
seconds. 
.LP

.TP
.BI --log-level={0..4}
Sets the amount of logging from fatal errors only (0), to a huge amount
of trace logging (4). The default level is 1. Note that logging will 
only be seen with the \fI--foreground\fR option.
.LP

.TP
.BI --max-files=N
Limit the number of files stored by the program. If this limit is reached,
\fIlbc\fR will show a warning message. The default value is 1000.
.LP

.TP
.BI -m,--method={name}
Sets the background changing method. See the section 'Background change
methods' for more information.
.LP

.TP
.BI -n,--next
Makes a running instance of LBC switch to the next background image.
.LP

.TP
.BI -p,--prev
Makes a running instance of LBC switch to the previous background image.
.LP

.TP
.BI -s,--stop
Shut down an instance of the program running in the background.
.LP

.TP
.BI -v,--version
Show version number, and exit
.LP

.TP
.BI -w,--width={pixels}
Include only images of at least the specified width.
.LP


.SH "SIGNALS"

\fIlbc\fR responds to the signals USR1 and USR2, by
switching to the next and the previous background image respectively. 
An INT signal should cause it to shut down cleanly.


.SH BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

LBC does not process images -- it simply 
passes their filenames to the desktop. No checks are done to ensure the
suitability of the images if finds in the directories specified, beyond
basic checks on the filename, size, and aspect ratio. 
In particular, the program will not attempt
to scale or clip images; they are assumed to fit the screen at least 
approximately. The desktop may scale or clip, and this behaviour
may be configurable.

All the image filenames found by 
\fIlbc\fR when scanning directories are held in
memory for the life of the program. This can use a lot of memory, and
lead to slow start-up times, if many images are involved. However, working
this way does have the advantage of minimizing disk activity after the 
initial start-up period. This is potentially important if you like your
disks to remain in the standby state when not in use. The
\fI--max-files\fR switch can be used to limit the number of files stored.

.SH "RC FILES"

LBC reads \fI/etc/lbc.rc\fR and \fI$HOME/.lbc.rc\fR. Any of the
long-form command-line arguments can be used, in the form
'name=value'.

.SH AUTHOR AND LEGAL
LBC is maintained by Kevin Boone, and is open source under the
terms of the GNU Public Licence, version 3.0. There is no warranty
of any kind.



.\" end of file
